---
title: "Performance evaluation of dipstick-based wastewater surveillance of viruses through multi-operator Gage R&R study"
collection: publications
category: presentations
permalink: /publications/2024-11-11-italy/
excerpt: "Awarded Best Poster for presenting a multi-operator Gage repeatability and reproducibility study demonstrating acceptable variability of the dipstick method for on field surveillance of PMMoV viral load with fluctutations in population density."
date: 2024-11-11
venue: "International Conference on Pandemic preparedness Achievements, current challenges, and new frontiers organized by Area Science Park and ICGEB, Trieste, Italy."
paperurl: "/assets/pdf/poster.pdf"

---
**Validating the utility of dipstick method for on-field wastewater surveillance using a multi-operator Gage R&R variability study.**
The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the development of low-cost assays for automated wastewater surveillance, essential for early warning of frequent disease outbreaks and future pandemics. Microbial concentration remains a major challenge in wastewater monitoring due to sample variability and low pathogen loads. For large scale testing in densely populated low- or middle-income countries (LMICs) such assays need to be low-cost, rapid with high recovery efficiency. To address this constraint, we have devised an easy and rapid dipstick method for RNA isolation suitable for sub-millilitre sample volumes alleviating the complexities of existing RNA isolation methods. The dipstick method involves RNA capture by immersing the dipstick in the sample followed by a washing step to eliminate cell debris and impurities and finally eluting the RNA in mastermix by rigorous bending and compression. Our key contributions are:
1.	We have validated the dipstick method for successfully concentrating and isolating nucleic acids from different microbes such as SARS-CoV-2, PMMoV, and Phi6 from a wide range of wastewater samples with minimal sample pre-processing, with recovery efficiency at par with commercially available kits. 
2.	We have studied variability of the dipstick method by performing a multi-operator Gage repeatability and reproducibility (Gage R&R) study for wastewater samples collected from a sewage pumping station at IIT Bombay. This study demonstrated that the dipstick method has Gage R&R <30%, and could detect variations in PMMoV load associated with changes in population density due to summer break. 
3.	We further simplified the dipstick procedure by automating dipstick preparation and assay operation steps that contributed to variability. Our analysis revealed that the simplified method does not adversely impact Gage R&R, with variability arising mainly due to sample variation, confirming overall acceptability.


**Recommended citation:**  
*Ahuja, S. et al.* *Performance evaluation of dipstick-based wastewater surveillance of viruses through multi-operator Gage R&R study.* International Conference on Pandemic preparedness Achievements, current challenges, and new frontiers organized by Area Science Park and ICGEB, Trieste, Italy, (2024).

👉 [View Poster]({{ page.paperurl }})
