---
title: "Low-Cost, Rapid, Instrument-Free Dipstick Method for Wastewater Surveillance in LMICs "
collection: publications
category: Presentations
permalink: /publications/2025-06-30-uk/
excerpt: 'Poster presented at the International Pandemic Sciences Conference, arranged by the Pandemic Sciences Institute, University of Oxford, UK.'
excerpt: 'A pipeline of pathogen capture, nucleic acid extraction and amplification along with metagenomics using lab developed dipstick and pTFE membrane filtration method'
date: 2025-06-30
venue: 'International Pandemic Sciences Conference, University of Oxford, UK'
slideurl: "https://drive.google.com/file/d/12j7BEORr0znaKiYDEmf_fQkMeu6vtues/view?usp=sharing"
Recommended citation: 'Ahuja, S. et al. Low-Cost, Rapid, Instrument-Free Dipstick Method for Wastewater Surveillance in LMICs, International Pandemic Science conference, University of Oxford UK (2025).' 
---
LMICs face significant challenges in individual clinical diagnostics due to resource constraints and large populations. Wastewater surveillance enables community-level monitoring but its hindered by the lack of accessible, field-deployable sample processing, microbial capture, and nucleic acid extraction methods. We present a low-cost, instrument-free, paper-dipstick method with minimal sample pre-processing suitable for sub-millitre volumes that bridges this gap, enabling pathogen detection in resource-limited settings without specialized infrastructure. 
Using this method, we successfully detected SARS-CoV-2, pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV), E. coli, and 16S rRNA gene from wastewater with comparable recovery efficiency to a commercial kit method. A multi-operator gage R&R study further validated its reproducibility and field applicability. Preliminary results for 16srRNA gene capture suggest potential for metagenomic sequencing, although additional optimization is needed to enhance the DNA yield. 
This scalable, decentralized, lab-free platform is ideal for LMICs such as India, Bangladesh, and African nations, allowing local communities to conduct testing without skilled personnel. Real-time hotspot identification enables early intervention, targeted containment, and improved outbreak preparedness. The resulting epidemiological data enables policymakers to develop data-driven public health strategies and allocate resources efficiently to mitigate the spread of infections.


**Recommended citation:** 'Ahuja, S. et al. Low-Cost, Rapid, Instrument-Free Dipstick Method for Wastewater Surveillance in LMICs, International Pandemic Science conference, University of Oxford UK (2025).' 

👉 [View Poster]({{ page.paperurl }})

